# Working with JSON

# Introduction

JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) is a simple data interchange format. Syntactically it resembles the objects and lists of JavaScript. It is most commonly used for communication between web back-ends and JavaScript programs running in the browser, but it is used in many other places, too. Its home page, [json.org](json.org), provides a wonderfully clear and concise definition of the standard.

With the [json package](https://golang.org/pkg/encoding/json/) it's a snap to read and write JSON data from your Go programs.

## Encoding

To encode JSON data we use the `Marshal` function.

```go
func Marshal(v interface{}) ([]byte, error)
```

Given the Go data structure, `Message`:

```go
type Message struct {
  Name string
  Body string
  Time int64
}
```

and an instance of `Message`

```go
m := Message{"Alice", "Hello", 1294706395881547000}
```

we can marshal a JSON-encoded version of m using `json.Marshal`:

```go
b, err := json.Marshal(m)
```

If all is well, err will be `nil` and b will be a `[]byte` containing this JSON data:

```go
b == []byte(`{"Name":"Alice","Body":"Hello","Time":1294706395881547000}`)
```

Only data structures that can be represented as valid JSON will be encoded:

- JSON objects only support strings as keys; to encode a Go map type it must be of the form map[string]T (where T is any Go type supported by the json package).
- Channel, complex, and function types cannot be encoded.
- Cyclic data structures are not supported; they will cause Marshal to go into an infinite loop.
- Pointers will be encoded as the values they point to (or 'null' if the pointer is nil).

The json package only accesses the exported fields of struct types (those that begin with an uppercase letter). Therefore only the the exported fields of a struct will be present in the JSON output.

## Decoding

To decode JSON data we use the `Unmarshal` function.

```go
func Unmarshal(data []byte, v interface{}) error
```

We must first create a place where the decoded data will be stored

```go
var m Message
```

and call json.Unmarshal, passing it a `[]byte` of JSON data and a pointer to `m`

```go
err := json.Unmarshal(b, &m)
```

If `b` contains valid JSON that fits in `m`, after the call `err` will be `nil` and the data from `b` will have been stored in the struct `m`, as if by an assignment like:

```go
m = Message{
  Name: "Alice",
  Body: "Hello",
  Time: 1294706395881547000,
}
```

How does `Unmarshal` identify the fields in which to store the decoded data? For a given JSON key `"Foo"`, `Unmarshal` will look through the destination struct's fields to find (in order of preference):

- An exported field with a tag of "Foo" (see the Go spec for more on struct tags),
- An exported field named "Foo", or
- An exported field named "FOO" or "FoO" or some other case-insensitive match of "Foo".

What happens when the structure of the JSON data doesn't exactly match the Go type?

```go
b := []byte(`{"Name":"Bob","Food":"Pickle"}`)
var m Message
err := json.Unmarshal(b, &m)
```

`Unmarshal` will decode only the fields that it can find in the destination type. In this case, only the Name field of m will be populated, and the Food field will be ignored. This behavior is particularly useful when you wish to pick only a few specific fields out of a large JSON blob. It also means that any unexported fields in the destination struct will be unaffected by `Unmarshal`.

> But what if you don't know the structure of your JSON data beforehand?

## Generic JSON with interface{}

The `interface{}` (empty interface) type describes an interface with zero methods. Every Go type implements at least zero methods and therefore satisfies the empty interface.

The empty interface serves as a general container type:

```go
var i interface{}
i = "a string"
i = 2011
i = 2.777
```

A type assertion accesses the underlying concrete type:

```go
r := i.(float64)
fmt.Println("the circle's area", math.Pi*r*r)
```

Or, if the underlying type is unknown, a type switch determines the type:

```go
switch v := i.(type) {
case int:
  fmt.Println("twice i is", v*2)
case float64:
  fmt.Println("the reciprocal of i is", 1/v)
case string:
  h := len(v) / 2
  fmt.Println("i swapped by halves is", v[h:]+v[:h])
default:
  // i isn't one of the types above
}
```

The json package uses `map[string]interface{}` and `[]interface{}` values to store arbitrary JSON objects and arrays; it will happily unmarshal any valid JSON blob into a plain `interface{}` value. The default concrete Go types are:

- bool for JSON booleans
- float64 for JSON numbers
- string for JSON strings
- nil for JSON null

## Decoding arbitrary data

Consider this JSON data, stored in the variable b:

```go
b := []byte(`{"Name":"Wednesday","Age":6,"Parents":["Gomez","Morticia"]}`)
```

Without knowing this data's structure, we can decode it into an `interface{}` value with `Unmarshal`:

```go
var f interface{}
err := json.Unmarshal(b, &f)
```

At this point the Go value in f would be a map whose keys are strings and whose values are themselves stored as empty interface values:

```go
f = map[string]interface{}{
  "Name": "Wednesday",
  "Age":  6,
  "Parents": []interface{}{
      "Gomez",
      "Morticia",
  },
}
```

To access this data we can use a type assertion to access f's underlying `map[string]interface{}`:

```go
m := f.(map[string]interface{})
```

We can then iterate through the map with a range statement and use a type switch to access its values as their concrete types:

```go
for k, v := range m {
  switch vv := v.(type) {
  case string:
    fmt.Println(k, "is string", vv)
  case float64:
    fmt.Println(k, "is float64", vv)
  case []interface{}:
    fmt.Println(k, "is an array:")
    for i, u := range vv {
      fmt.Println(i, u)
    }
  default:
    fmt.Println(k, "is of a type I don't know how to handle")
  }
}
```
In this way you can work with unknown JSON data while still enjoying the benefits of type safety.

## Struct Tags

One thing you'll notice is the **tagged** data included in our struct between backticks. The JSON parser reads from that several clues about how to parse that value.

### Field name

As you might know, Go requires all exported fields to start with a capitalized letter. It's not common to use that style in JSON however. We use the tag to let the parser know where to actually look for the value.

You can see an example of that in the example above, but as a refresher this is what it looks like:

```go
type MyStruct struct {
  SomeField string `json:"some_field"`
}
```

### Field is empty

The JSON parser also accepts a flag in the tag to let it know what to do if the field is empty. The `omitempty` flag tells it to not include the JSON value in the output if it's the **zero-value** for that type.

The **zero-value** for numbers is `0`, for strings it's the empty string, for maps, slices and pointers it's `nil`. This is how you include the `omitempty` flag.

```go
type MyStruct struct {
  SomeField string `json:"some_field,omitempty"`
}
```

Notice that the flag goes inside the quotes.

If the `SomeField` was an empty string, and you converted it to JSON, `some_field` wouldn't be included in the output at all.

In other words, if `some_field == ""`:

- With `omitempty` the JSON value would be `{}`
- Without `omitempty` the JSON value would be ` {"some_field": ""}`

`omitempty` is valuable when you deprecate a field and no longer want it to be included in output, when you have a flag which defaults to false so there's no need to include it, or when you are only ever operating on your data with Go, so there's no harm in using the built-in `zero-value` as the default.

### Skipping field

To have the JSON parser/writer skip a field, just give it the name `"-"`. For example:

```go
type App struct {
  Id string `json:"id"`
  Password string `json:"-"`
}
```

It can also make sense to have a field which will be parsed if it's available, but will never be outputted. The native JSON parser doesn't have that option, but here is an example implementation.




## Reference Types

Let's define a Go type to contain the data from the previous example:

```go
type FamilyMember struct {
  Name    string
  Age     int
  Parents []string
}
var m FamilyMember
err := json.Unmarshal(b, &m)
```

Unmarshaling that data into a `FamilyMember` value works as expected, but if we look closely we can see a remarkable thing has happened. With the var statement we allocated a `FamilyMember` struct, and then provided a pointer to that value to `Unmarshal`, but at that time the Parents field was a `nil` slice value. To populate the `Parents` field, `Unmarshal` allocated a new slice behind the scenes. This is typical of how `Unmarshal` works with the supported reference types (pointers, slices, and maps).

Consider unmarshaling into this data structure:

```go
type Foo struct {
  Bar *Bar
}
```

If there were a `Bar` field in the JSON object, `Unmarshal` would allocate a new `Bar` and populate it. If not, `Bar` would be left as a `nil` pointer.

From this a useful pattern arises: if you have an application that receives a few distinct message types, you might define "receiver" structure like

```go
type IncomingMessage struct {
  Cmd *Command
  Msg *Message
}
```

and the sending party can populate the `Cmd` field and/or the `Msg` field of the top-level JSON object, depending on the type of message they want to communicate. `Unmarshal`, when decoding the JSON into an `IncomingMessage` struct, will only allocate the data structures present in the JSON data. To know which messages to process, the programmer need simply test that either `Cmd` or `Msg` is not `nil`.

## Streaming Encoders and Decoders

The json package provides `Decoder` and `Encoder` types to support the common operation of reading and writing streams of JSON data. The `NewDecoder` and `NewEncoder` functions wrap the `io.Reader` and `io.Writer` interface types.

```go
func NewDecoder(r io.Reader) *Decoder
func NewEncoder(w io.Writer) *Encoder
```

Here's an example program that reads a series of JSON objects from standard input, removes all but the Name field from each object, and then writes the objects to standard output:

```go
package main

import (
  "encoding/json"
  "log"
  "os"
)

func main() {
  dec := json.NewDecoder(os.Stdin)
  enc := json.NewEncoder(os.Stdout)
  for {
    var v map[string]interface{}
    if err := dec.Decode(&v); err != nil {
      log.Println(err)
      return
    }
    for k := range v {
      if k != "Name" {
        delete(v, k)
      }
    }
    if err := enc.Encode(&v); err != nil {
      log.Println(err)
    }
  }
}
```

Due to the ubiquity of Readers and Writers, these Encoder and Decoder types can be used in a broad range of scenarios, such as reading and writing to HTTP connections, WebSockets, or files.

### Streaming JSON into a File

Writing JSON is also very similar. We need to open a file in write mode, grab the `io.Writer` and pass it to `json.NewEncoder` – then we can pass our data to the `Encode` method to stream the json into the file.

```go
package main

import (
  "encoding/json"
  "os"
)

type Person struct {
  Name   string
  Age    int
  Emails []string
}

func main() {
  tpphu := Person{
    Name:   "Tran Phong Phu",
    Age:    20,
    Emails: []string{"vietean@gmail.com", "phu.tran@nordiccoder.com"},
  }

  fileWriter, _ := os.Create("output.json")
  json.NewEncoder(fileWriter).Encode(masnun)
}
```

### Streaming JSON from a File

We can open a JSON file using the `os.Open` function and stream it using the json.NewDecoder function. Here’s a quick example:

```go
package main

import (
  "encoding/json"
  "fmt"
  "os"
)

func main() {

  fileReader, _ := os.Open("output.json")
  var tpphu map[string]interface{}
  json.NewDecoder(fileReader).Decode(&tpphu)
  fmt.Println(tpphu)

}
```

## Credits

- [JSON and Go](https://blog.golang.org/json-and-go)
- [Golang: Working with JSON](http://polyglot.ninja/golang-json/)


